PMID: 32776321
Title: Precision medicine and therapies of the future.
Authors: Sanjay M Sisodiya
Journal: Epilepsia
Year: 2021
MeSH Terms: Epilepsy, Forecasting, Genetic Variation, Humans, Mutation, Pedigree, Precision Medicine

Abstract:
Precision medicine in the epilepsies has gathered much attention, especially with gene discovery pushing forward new understanding of disease biology. Several targeted treatments are emerging, some with considerable sophistication and individual-level tailoring. There have been rare achievements in improving short-term outcomes in a few very select patients with epilepsy. The prospects for further targeted, repurposed, or novel treatments seem promising. Along with much-needed success, difficulties are also arising. Precision treatments do not always work, and sometimes are inaccessible or do not yet exist. Failures of precision medicine may not find their way to broader scrutiny. Precision medicine is not a new concept: It has been boosted by genetics and is often focused on genetically determined epilepsies, typically considered to be driven in an individual by a single genetic variant. Often the mechanisms generating the full clinical phenotype from such a perceived single cause are incompletely understood. The impact of additional genetic variation and other factors that might influence the clinical presentation represent complexities that are not usually considered. Precision success and precision failure are usually equally incompletely explained. There is a need for more comprehensive evaluation and a more rigorous framework, bringing together information that is both necessary and sufficient to explain clinical presentation and clinical responses to precision treatment in a precision approach that considers the full picture not only of the effects of a single variant, but also of its genomic and other measurable environment, within the context of the whole person. As we may be on the brink of a treatment revolution, progress must be considered and reasoned: One possible framework is proposed for the evaluation of precision treatments.
