PMID: 38802994
Title: Global modified Delphi consensus on diagnosis, phenotypes, and treatment of SCN8A-related epilepsy and/or neurodevelopmental disorders.
Authors: Gabrielle Conecker, Maya Y Xia, JayEtta Hecker, Christelle Achkar, Cristine Cukiert
Journal: Epilepsia
Year: 2024
MeSH Terms: Humans, Anticonvulsants, Delphi Technique, Epilepsy, NAV1.6 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel, Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Phenotype

Abstract:
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to develop consensus for diagnosis/management of SCN8A-related disorders. Utilizing a modified Delphi process, a global cohort of experienced clinicians and caregivers provided input on diagnosis, phenotypes, treatment, and management of SCN8A-related disorders. METHODS: A Core Panel (13 clinicians, one researcher, six caregivers), divided into three subgroups (diagnosis/phenotypes, treatment, comorbidities/prognosis), performed a literature review and developed questions for the modified Delphi process. Twenty-eight expert clinicians, one researcher, and 13 caregivers from 16 countries participated in the subsequent three survey rounds. We defined consensus as follows: strong consensus, ≥80% fully agree; moderate consensus, ≥80% fully/partially agree, <10% disagree; and modest consensus, 67%-79% fully/partially agree, <10% disagree. RESULTS: Early diagnosis is important for long-term clinical outcomes in SCN8A-related disorders. There are five phenotypes: three with early seizure onset (severe developmental and epileptic encephalopathy [DEE], mild/moderate DEE, self-limited (familial) infantile epilepsy [SeL(F)IE]) and two with later/no seizure onset (neurodevelopmental delay with generalized epilepsy [NDDwGE], NDD without epilepsy [NDDwoE]). Caregivers represented six patients with severe DEE, five mild/moderate DEE, one NDDwGE, and one NDDwoE. Phenotypes vary by age at seizures/developmental delay onset, seizure type, electroencephalographic/magnetic resonance imaging findings, and first-line treatment. Gain of function (GOF) versus loss of function (LOF) is valuable for informing treatment. Sodium channel blockers are optimal first-line treatment for GOF, severe DEE, mild/moderate DEE, and SeL(F)IE; levetiracetam is relatively contraindicated in GOF patients. First-line treatment for NDDwGE is valproate, ethosuximide, or lamotrigine; sodium channel blockers are relatively contraindicated in LOF patients. SIGNIFICANCE: This is the first-ever global consensus for the diagnosis and treatment of SCN8A-related disorders. This consensus will reduce knowledge gaps in disease recognition and inform preferred treatment across this heterogeneous disorder. Consensus of this type allows more clinicians to provide evidence-based care and empowers SCN8A families to advocate for their children.
