PMID: 38037515
Title: Genetic analysis and literature review of a Poirier-Bienvenu neurodevelopmental syndrome family line caused by a de novo frameshift variant in CSNK2B.
Authors: Danyang Li, Bingbo Zhou, Xinyuan Tian, Xue Chen, Yupei Wang
Journal: Molecular genetics & genomic medicine
Year: 2024
MeSH Terms: Male, Humans, Frameshift Mutation, Mutation, Intellectual Disability, Exome Sequencing

Abstract:
BACKGROUND: Poirier-Bienvenu neurodevelopmental syndrome (POBINDS) is a rare autosomal dominant neurologic disorder caused by a heterozygous variant of CSNK2B, which is characterized by early onset epilepsy, hypotonia, varying degrees of intellectual disability (ID), developmental delay (DD), and facial dysmorphism. This study clarifies the molecular diagnosis and causative factors of a Chinese boy with POBINDS. METHODS: The clinical phenotypes and ancillary laboratory tests were collected and analyzed by trio whole exome sequencing (WES) and copy number variant sequencing (CNV-seq) in the follow-up proband's families. The candidate variant was validated by Sanger sequencing and bioinformatics software was used to further explore the effect of the de novo frameshift variant on the protein structure. RESULTS: The proband carries a de novo frameshift variant c.453_c.454insAC (p.H152fs*76) in CSNK2B. According to the ACMG genetic variant classification criteria and guidelines, the locus is a pathogenic variant (PVS1+PS2+PM2) and the associated disease was POBINDS. Protein structure prediction suggests significant differences in amino acid sequences before and after mutation. CONCLUSION: A rare case of POBINDS caused by a novel frameshift variant in CSNK2B was diagnosed. The novel variant extends the variation spectrum of CSNK2B, which provides guidance for early clinical diagnosis, genetic counseling and treatment of this family. A review of the currently reported cases of POBINDS further enriches and summarizes the relationship between genotype and phenotype of POBINDS.
