PMID: 33895391
Title: Mutations in the sodium channel genes SCN1A, SCN3A, and SCN9A in children with epilepsy with febrile seizures plus(EFS+).
Authors: Hongxia Ma, Yuxiong Guo, Zhihong Chen, Lingan Wang, Zhihong Tang
Journal: Seizure
Year: 2021
MeSH Terms: Asian People, Child, China, Epilepsies, Myoclonic, Epilepsy, Humans, Mutation, NAV1.1 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel, NAV1.3 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel, NAV1.7 Voltage-Gated Sodium Channel

Abstract:
PURPOSE: To explore disease-causing gene mutations of epilepsy with febrile seizures plus (EFS+) in Southern Chinese Han population. METHODS: Blood samples and clinical data were collected from 49 Southern Han Chinese patients with EFS+. Gene screening was performed using whole-exome sequencing and panel sequencing for 485 epilepsy-related genes. The pathogenicity of variants was evaluated based on ACMG scoring and assessment of clinical concordance. RESULTS: We identified 10 putatively causative sodium channel gene variants in 49 patients with EFS+, including 8 variants in SCN1A (R500Q appeared twice), one in SCN3A and one in SCN9A. All these missense mutations were inherited from maternal or paternal and were evaluated to be of uncertain significance according to ACMG. The clinical features of patients were in concordance with the EFS+ phenotype of the mutated SCN1A, SCN3A and SCN9A gene. The clinical phenotypes of 11 probands with these gene variants included febrile seizures plus (FS+, n=7), Dravet Syndrome (n=3), FS+ with focal seizures (n=1). Three probands with SCN1A variants (R500Q located in the non-voltage areas, or G1711D in the pore-forming domain) developed severe Dravet syndrome. The affected individuals with the other 6 SCN1A variants located outside the pore-forming domain showed mild phenotypes. Novel SCN3A variant ((D1688Y) and SCN9A variant (R185H) were identified in two probands respectively and both of the probands had FS+. CONCLUSION: The SCN1A, SCN3A, and SCN9A gene mutations might be a pathogenic cause of EFS+ in Southern Chinese Han population.
