PMID: 39017914
Title: Multicenter retrospective study of patients with PCDH19-related epilepsy: The first Hungarian cohort.
Authors: Monika Kovacs, Andras Fogarasi, Marta Hegyi, Zsuzsanna Siegler, Anna Kelemen
Journal: Epileptic disorders : international epilepsy journal with videotape
Year: 2024
MeSH Terms: Humans, Female, Protocadherins, Retrospective Studies, Child, Male, Child, Preschool, Epilepsy, Adolescent, Hungary

Abstract:
OBJECTIVE: PCDH19-related epilepsy occurs predominantly in girls and is caused by pathogenic variant of the protocadherin-19 gene. The initial seizures usually develop in association with fever, begin on average at 15 months of age, and often occur in clusters. Autistic symptoms, intellectual disability, and sleep disturbance are often associated. METHODS: In our retrospective, multicenter study, we reviewed clinical data of nine children with epilepsy genetically confirmed to be associated with PCDH19. RESULTS: In the Hungarian patient population aged 0-18 years, the prevalence of PCDH19-related epilepsy was found to be lower (1/100000 live births in females) than the reported international data (4-5/100000 live births in females). Four of our nine patients had positive family history of epilepsy (cousins, sister, and mother). We assessed brain anomalies in three patients (in one patient focal cortical dysplasia and left anterior cingulate dysgenesis, and in two children right or left hippocampal sclerosis) and in another three cases incidentally identified benign alterations on brain MRI were found. The first seizure presented as a cluster in seven out of nine children. In seven out of nine cases occurred status epilepticus. Six out of nine children had autistic symptoms and only one child had normal intellectual development. Seven of our patients were seizure free with combined antiseizure medication (ASM). The most effective ASMs were levetiracetam, valproate, and clobazam. SIGNIFICANCE: The prevalence of PCDH19-related epilepsy is presumably underestimated because of the lack of widely performed molecular genetic evaluations. Molecular genetic testing including PCDH19 pathogenic variants is recommended for female patients with an onset of seizures before the age of 3 years.
