PMID: 39391213
Title: A roadmap to cure CHD2-related disorders.
Authors: Stephanie Prince, Emily Bonkowski, Christopher McGraw, Christina SanInocencio, Heather C Mefford
Journal: Therapeutic advances in rare disease
Year: 2024
MeSH Terms: 

Abstract:
Coalition to Cure CHD2 (CCC) is a patient advocacy group dedicated to improving the lives of those affected by CHD2-related disorders (CHD2-RD) by increasing education, building community, and accelerating research to uncover a cure. CHD2 is a chromatin remodeler that was identified in 2013 as being a genetic cause for developmental and epileptic encephalopathies. Pathogenic changes in CHD2 can cause treatment-resistant epilepsy, intellectual and developmental delays, and autism, and some individuals experience neurodevelopmental regression. There are currently no targeted therapies available for CHD2-related disorders. Haploinsufficiency of CHD2 is a causative mechanism of disease for individuals with pathogenic variants (primarily truncating) in CHD2. Recently, identification of individuals with deletion of nearby gene CHASERR, a regulator of CHD2 gene expression, has established dosage sensitivity in CHD2 and solidified the CHASERR gene as a potential therapeutic target for CHD2 levels. Through collaboration with our community and our scientific advisory board, CCC has created a Roadmap to Cure CHD2 as our guide toward a targeted cure that can benefit our community, with steps including (1) identifying and defining patients, (2) developing models of CHD2, (3) studying models of CHD2, (4) testing therapies, (5) involving patients, and (6) reaching a cure. Despite some of the challenges inherent in CHD2 research including establishing animal and cellular models that recapitulate the CHD2 clinical phenotype, identifying measurable outcomes and reliable biomarkers, or testing emerging therapeutic approaches, CCC continues to engage with our community to support ongoing research that aligns with our priorities. CCC sees new and exciting opportunities for additional research that can move our community toward our common goal of a cure that will improve the lives of individuals and their families now and in the future.
