PMID: 32317161
Title: Biomarkers for posttraumatic epilepsy.
Authors: Asla Pitkänen, Tomi Paananen, Jenni Kyyriäinen, Shalini Das Gupta, Mette Heiskanen
Journal: Epilepsy & behavior : E&B
Year: 2021
MeSH Terms: Biomarkers, Brain Injuries, Traumatic, Epilepsy, Epilepsy, Post-Traumatic, Humans, ROC Curve

Abstract:
A biomarker is a characteristic that can be objectively measured as an indicator of normal biologic processes, pathogenic processes, or responses to an exposure or intervention, including therapeutic interventions. Biomarker modalities include molecular, histologic, radiographic, or physiologic characteristics. To improve the understanding and use of biomarker terminology in biomedical research, clinical practice, and medical product development, the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-National Institutes of Health (NIH) Joint Leadership Council developed the BEST Resource (Biomarkers, EndpointS, and other Tools). The seven BEST biomarker categories include the following: (a) susceptibility/risk biomarkers, (b) diagnostic biomarkers, (c) monitoring biomarkers, (d) prognostic biomarkers, (e) predictive biomarkers, (f) pharmacodynamic/response biomarkers, and (g) safety biomarkers. We hypothesize some potential overlap between the reported biomarkers of traumatic brain injury (TBI), epilepsy, and posttraumatic epilepsy (PTE). Here, we tested this hypothesis by reviewing studies focusing on biomarker discovery for posttraumatic epileptogenesis and epilepsy. The biomarker modalities reviewed here include plasma/serum and cerebrospinal fluid molecular biomarkers, imaging biomarkers, and electrophysiologic biomarkers. Most of the reported biomarkers have an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve greater than 0.800, suggesting both high sensitivity and high specificity. Our results revealed little overlap in the biomarker candidates between TBI, epilepsy, and PTE. In addition to using single parameters as biomarkers, machine learning approaches have highlighted the potential for utilizing patterns of markers as biomarkers. Although published data suggest the possibility of identifying biomarkers for PTE, we are still in the early phase of the development curve. Many of the seven biomarker categories lack PTE-related biomarkers. Thus, further exploration using proper, statistically powered, and standardized study designs with validation cohorts, and by developing and applying novel analytical methods, is needed for PTE biomarker discovery.
