PMID: 39029408
Title: Familial mesial temporal lobe epilepsy phenotype is associated with novel LGI1 variants: A report of two families.
Authors: Chengzhe Wang, Xintong Guo, Dingju Long, Yinchao Li, Cai Yuan
Journal: Seizure
Year: 2024
MeSH Terms: Adolescent, Adult, Child, Female, Humans, Male, Young Adult, Epilepsy, Temporal Lobe, Intracellular Signaling Peptides and Proteins, Mutation

Abstract:
OBJECTIVE: To expand the clinical phenotype and mutation spectrum of familial mesial temporal lobe epilepsy (FMTLE) and provide a new perspective for exploring the pathological mechanisms of epilepsy caused by leucine-rich glioma inactivated 1 (LGI1) variants. METHODS: We reported clinical data from two families with FMTLE and screened patients for variants in the LGI1 gene using Whole-exome sequencing and Sanger sequencing. The clinical features of FMTLE were analysed. The pathogenicity of the causative loci was assessed according to the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics guidelines, and potential pathogenic mechanisms were predicted through multiple bioinformatics and molecular dynamics software. RESULTS: We identified two novel LGI1 truncating variants within two large families with FMTLE: LGI1 (c.1174C>T, p.Q392X) and LGI1 (c.703C>T, p.Q235X). Compared to previous reports, we found that focal to bilateral tonic-clonic seizures are a common type of seizure in FMTLE. The clinical phenotypes of patients with FMTLE caused by LGI1 variants were relatively mild, and all patients responded well to valproic acid. Bioinformatics analyses and molecular dynamics simulations showed that protein structure and interactions were considerably weakened or damaged as a result of both variants. CONCLUSION: This study presents the first report identifying LGI1 as a potential novel pathogenic gene within FMTLE families, thereby broadening the mutation spectrum associated with FMTLE. The findings of this study offer novel insights and avenues for understanding the intricate molecular mechanisms underlying LGI1 variants and their correlations with patient phenotypes. This study proposes the possibility of familial focal epilepsy syndromes overlapping.
