PMID: 39251501
Title: Rett Syndrome: The Emerging Landscape of Treatment Strategies.
Authors: Alan K Percy, Amitha Ananth, Jeffrey L Neul
Journal: CNS drugs
Year: 2024
MeSH Terms: Rett Syndrome, Humans, Animals, Methyl-CpG-Binding Protein 2, Disease Models, Animal

Abstract:
Rett syndrome (RTT) has enjoyed remarkable progress in achieving specific therapies. RTT, a unique neurodevelopmental disorder first described in 1966, progressed slowly until the landmark paper of Hagberg and colleagues in 1983. Thereafter, rapid advances were achieved including the development of specific diagnostic criteria and the active search for a genetic etiology, resulting 16 years later in identification of variants in the methyl-CpG-binding protein (MECP2) gene located at Xq28. Shortly thereafter, the NIH Office of Rare Diseases funded the RTT Natural History Study (NHS) in 2003, initiating the acquisition of natural history data on clinical features from a large population of individuals with RTT. This information was essential for advancement of clinical trials to provide specific therapies for this disorder. In the process, the International Rett Syndrome Association (IRSA) was formed (now the International Rett Syndrome Foundation-IRSF), which participated directly in encouraging and expanding enrollment in the NHS and, subsequently, in developing the SCOUT program to facilitate testing of potential therapeutic agents in a mouse model of RTT. The overall objective was to review clinical characteristics developed from the NHS and to discuss the status of specific therapies for this progressive neurodevelopmental disorder. The NHS study provided critical information on RTT: growth, anthropometrics, longevity, key comorbidities including epilepsy, breath abnormalities, gastroesophageal dysfunction, scoliosis and other orthopedic issues, puberty, behavior and anxiety, and progressive motor deterioration including the appearance of parkinsonian features. Phenotype-genotype correlations were noted including the role of X chromosome inactivation. Development of clinical severity and quality of life measures also proved critical for subsequent clinical trials. Further, development of biochemical and neurophysiologic biomarkers offered further endpoints for clinical trials. Initial clinical trials prior to the NHS were ineffective, but advances resulting from the NHS and other studies worldwide promoted significant interest from pharmaceutical firms resulting in several clinical trials. While some of these have been unrewarding such as sarizotan, others have been quite promising including the approval of trofinetide by the FDA in 2023 as the first agent available for specific treatment of RTT. Blarcamesine has been trialed in phase 3 trials, 14 agents have been studied in phase 2 trials, and 7 agents are being evaluated in preclinical/translational studies. A landmark study in 2007 by Guy et al. demonstrated that activation of a normal MECP2 gene in a null mouse model resulted in significant improvement. Gene replacement therapy has advanced through translational studies to two current phase 1/2 clinical trials (Taysha102 and Neurogene-401). Additional genetic therapies are also under study including gene editing, RNA editing, and X-chromosome reactivation. Taken together, progress in understanding and treating RTT over the past 40 years has been remarkable. This suggests that further advances can be expected.
