PMID: 38752894
Title: DEPDC5 plays a vital role in epilepsy: Genotypic and phenotypic features in cohort and literature.
Authors: Chunyu Gu, Xinping Wei, Dandan Yan, Yingzi Cai, Dong Li
Journal: Epileptic disorders : international epilepsy journal with videotape
Year: 2024
MeSH Terms: Humans, GTPase-Activating Proteins, Epilepsies, Partial, Male, Female, Genetic Association Studies, Phenotype, Child, Cohort Studies, Child, Preschool

Abstract:
OBJECTIVE: DEPDC5 emerges to play a vital role in focal epilepsy. However, genotype-phenotype correlation in DEPDC5-related focal epilepsies is challenging and controversial. In this study, we aim to investigate the genotypic and phenotypic features in DEPDC5-affected patients. METHODS: Genetic testing combined with criteria published by the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for Molecular Pathology (ACMG/AMP), was used to identify pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants in DEPDC5 among the cohort of 479 patients with focal epilepsy. Besides, the literature review was performed to explore the genotype-phenotype correlation and the penetrance in DEPDC5-related focal epilepsies. RESULTS: Eight unrelated probands were revealed to carry different pathogenic/likely pathogenic variants in DEPDC5 and the total prevalence of DEPDC5-related focal epilepsy was 1.67% in the cohort. Sixty-five variants from 28 studies were included in our review. Combined with the cases reported, null variants accounted for a larger proportion than missense variants and were related to unfavorable prognosis (drug resistance or even sudden unexpected death in epilepsy; χ SIGNIFICANCE: The study expands the variant spectrum of DEPDC5 and proves that the DEPDC5 variant plays a significant role in focal epilepsy. Due to the characteristics of phenotypic heterogeneity and incomplete penetrance, genetic testing is necessary despite no specific family history. And we propose to adopt the ACMG/AMP criteria refined by ClinGen Sequence Variant Interpretation Working Group, for consistency in usage and transparency in classification rationale. Moreover, we reveal an important message to clinicians that the prognosis of DEPDC5-affected patients is related to the variant type and complications.
