PMID: 39853501
Title: Targeting Kv7 Potassium Channels for Epilepsy.
Authors: Emilio Perucca, Maurizio Taglialatela
Journal: CNS drugs
Year: 2025
MeSH Terms: Humans, Anticonvulsants, Epilepsy, Animals, KCNQ2 Potassium Channel, Phenylenediamines, Carbamates, KCNQ3 Potassium Channel, KCNQ Potassium Channels

Abstract:
Voltage-gated Kv7 potassium channels, particularly Kv7.2 and Kv.7.3 channels, play a critical role in modulating susceptibility to seizures, and mutations in genes that encode these channels cause heterogeneous epilepsy phenotypes. On the basis of this evidence, activation of Kv7.2 and Kv.7.3 channels has long been considered an attractive target in the search for novel antiseizure medications. Ezogabine (retigabine), the first Kv7.2/3 activator introduced in 2011 for the treatment of focal seizures, was withdrawn from the market in 2017 due to declining use after discovery of its association with pigmentation changes in the retina, skin, and mucosae. A novel formulation of ezogabine for pediatric use (XEN496) has been recently investigated in children with KCNQ2-related developmental and epileptic encephalopathy, but the trial was terminated prematurely for reasons unrelated to safety. Among novel Kv7.2/3 openers in clinical development, azetukalner has shown dose-dependent efficacy against drug-resistant focal seizures with a good tolerability profile and no evidence of pigmentation-related adverse effects in early clinical studies, and it is now under investigation in phase III trials for the treatment of focal seizures, generalized tonic-clonic seizures, and major depressive disorder. Another Kv7.2/3 activator, BHV-7000, has completed phase I studies in healthy subjects, with excellent tolerability at plasma drug concentrations that exceed the median effective concentrations in a preclinical model of anticonvulsant activity, but no efficacy data in patients with epilepsy are available to date. Among other Kv7.2/3 activators in clinical development as potential antiseizure medications, pynegabine and CB-003 have completed phase I safety and pharmacokinetic studies, but results have not been yet reported. Overall, interest in targeting Kv7 channels for the treatment of epilepsy and for other indications remains strong. Future breakthroughs in this area could come from exploitation of mechanistic differences in the action of Kv7 activators, and from the development of molecules that combine Kv7 activation with other mechanisms of action.
