PMID: 38038360
Title: Gain-of-function and loss-of-function variants in GRIA3 lead to distinct neurodevelopmental phenotypes.
Authors: Berardo Rinaldi, Allan Bayat, Linda G Zachariassen, Jia-Hui Sun, Yu-Han Ge
Journal: Brain : a journal of neurology
Year: 2024
MeSH Terms: Humans, Male, Female, Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Child, Child, Preschool, Receptors, AMPA, Phenotype, Adolescent, Loss of Function Mutation

Abstract:
AMPA (α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid) receptors (AMPARs) mediate fast excitatory neurotransmission in the brain. AMPARs form by homo- or heteromeric assembly of subunits encoded by the GRIA1-GRIA4 genes, of which only GRIA3 is X-chromosomal. Increasing numbers of GRIA3 missense variants are reported in patients with neurodevelopmental disorders (NDD), but only a few have been examined functionally. Here, we evaluated the impact on AMPAR function of one frameshift and 43 rare missense GRIA3 variants identified in patients with NDD by electrophysiological assays. Thirty-one variants alter receptor function and show loss-of-function or gain-of-function properties, whereas 13 appeared neutral. We collected detailed clinical data from 25 patients (from 23 families) harbouring 17 of these variants. All patients had global developmental impairment, mostly moderate (9/25) or severe (12/25). Twelve patients had seizures, including focal motor (6/12), unknown onset motor (4/12), focal impaired awareness (1/12), (atypical) absence (2/12), myoclonic (5/12) and generalized tonic-clonic (1/12) or atonic (1/12) seizures. The epilepsy syndrome was classified as developmental and epileptic encephalopathy in eight patients, developmental encephalopathy without seizures in 13 patients, and intellectual disability with epilepsy in four patients. Limb muscular hypotonia was reported in 13/25, and hypertonia in 10/25. Movement disorders were reported in 14/25, with hyperekplexia or non-epileptic erratic myoclonus being the most prevalent feature (8/25). Correlating receptor functional phenotype with clinical features revealed clinical features for GRIA3-associated NDDs and distinct NDD phenotypes for loss-of-function and gain-of-function variants. Gain-of-function variants were associated with more severe outcomes: patients were younger at the time of seizure onset (median age: 1 month), hypertonic and more often had movement disorders, including hyperekplexia. Patients with loss-of-function variants were older at the time of seizure onset (median age: 16 months), hypotonic and had sleeping disturbances. Loss-of-function and gain-of-function variants were disease-causing in both sexes but affected males often carried de novo or hemizygous loss-of-function variants inherited from healthy mothers, whereas affected females had mostly de novo heterozygous gain-of-function variants.
