PMID: 36322151
Title: Delineation of a KDM2B-related neurodevelopmental disorder and its associated DNA methylation signature.
Authors: Richard H van Jaarsveld, Jack Reilly, Marie-Claire Cornips, Michael A Hadders, Emanuele Agolini
Journal: Genetics in medicine : official journal of the American College of Medical Genetics
Year: 2023
MeSH Terms: Mice, Animals, Humans, DNA Methylation, Neurodevelopmental Disorders, Intellectual Disability, DNA, Mutation

Abstract:
PURPOSE: Pathogenic variants in genes involved in the epigenetic machinery are an emerging cause of neurodevelopment disorders (NDDs). Lysine-demethylase 2B (KDM2B) encodes an epigenetic regulator and mouse models suggest an important role during development. We set out to determine whether KDM2B variants are associated with NDD. METHODS: Through international collaborations, we collected data on individuals with heterozygous KDM2B variants. We applied methylation arrays on peripheral blood DNA samples to determine a KDM2B associated epigenetic signature. RESULTS: We recruited a total of 27 individuals with heterozygous variants in KDM2B. We present evidence, including a shared epigenetic signature, to support a pathogenic classification of 15 KDM2B variants and identify the CxxC domain as a mutational hotspot. Both loss-of-function and CxxC-domain missense variants present with a specific subepisignature. Moreover, the KDM2B episignature was identified in the context of a dual molecular diagnosis in multiple individuals. Our efforts resulted in a cohort of 21 individuals with heterozygous (likely) pathogenic variants. Individuals in this cohort present with developmental delay and/or intellectual disability; autism; attention deficit disorder/attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; congenital organ anomalies mainly of the heart, eyes, and urogenital system; and subtle facial dysmorphism. CONCLUSION: Pathogenic heterozygous variants in KDM2B are associated with NDD and a specific epigenetic signature detectable in peripheral blood.
