PMID: 38681799
Title: Developing a pathway to clinical trials for 
Authors: Pangkong M Fox, Sunitha Malepati, Lisa Manaster, Elsa Rossignol, Jeffrey L Noebels
Journal: Therapeutic advances in rare disease
Year: 2024
MeSH Terms: 

Abstract:
CACNA1A-related disorders are rare neurodevelopmental disorders linked to variants in the CACNA1A gene. This gene encodes the α1 subunit of the P/Q-type calcium channel Cav2.1, which is globally expressed in the brain and crucial for fast synaptic neurotransmission. The broad spectrum of CACNA1A-related neurological disorders includes developmental and epileptic encephalopathies, familial hemiplegic migraine type 1, episodic ataxia type 2, spinocerebellar ataxia type 6, together with unclassified presentations with developmental delay, ataxia, intellectual disability, autism spectrum disorder, and language impairment. The severity of each disorder is also highly variable. The spectrum of CACNA1A-related seizures is broad across both loss-of-function and gain-of-function variants and includes absence seizures, focal seizures with altered consciousness, generalized tonic-clonic seizures, tonic seizures, status epilepticus, and infantile spasms. Furthermore, over half of CACNA1A-related epilepsies are refractory to current therapies. To date, almost 1700 CACNA1A variants have been reported in ClinVar, with over 400 listed as Pathogenic or Likely Pathogenic, but with limited-to-no clinical or functional data. Robust genotype-phenotype studies and impacts of variants on protein structure and function have also yet to be established. As a result, there are few definitive treatment options for CACNA1A-related epilepsies. The CACNA1A Foundation has set out to change the landscape of available and effective treatments and improve the quality of life for those living with CACNA1A-related disorders, including epilepsy. Established in March 2020, the Foundation has built a robust preclinical toolbox that includes patient-derived induced pluripotent stem cells and novel disease models, launched clinical trial readiness initiatives, and organized a global CACNA1A Research Network. This Research Network is currently composed of over 60 scientists and clinicians committed to collaborating to accelerate the path to CACNA1A-specific treatments and one day, a cure.
