PMID: 34995834
Title: Leu226Trp CACNA1A variant associated with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy with and without intellectual disability.
Authors: Elham Alehabib, Tomislav Kokotović, Sakineh Ranji-Burachaloo, Abbas Tafakhori, Samira Molaei Ramshe
Journal: Clinical neurology and neurosurgery
Year: 2022
MeSH Terms: Calcium Channels, Epilepsy, Generalized, Humans, Intellectual Disability, Iran, Myoclonic Epilepsy, Juvenile, Pedigree, Exome Sequencing, Calcium Channels, N-Type

Abstract:
OBJECTIVE: Epilepsy is a disease of Central Nervous System (CNS) characterized by abnormal brain activity and recurrent seizures and is considered a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disease. Here, we investigated pathogenic genetic alteration and described the clinical characteristics of three Iranian family members affected by Idiopathic Generalized Epilepsy (IGE) with and without intellectual disability. METHODS: A non-consanguineous Iranian family with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy was enrolled in the study. The comprehensive neurological evaluation included motor and sensory skills, vision, hearing, speech, coordination, and mood. Whole-exome Sequencing (WES) was performed on the proband to detect probable pathogenic variant, and after the filtering process, probable variants were evaluated with familial segregation analysis using Sanger sequencing. RESULTS: Using WES, we identified a heterozygous missense substitution (NM_023035.3:c.T677G:p.Leu226Trp) in CACNA1A gene in the studied family with juvenile myoclonic epilepsy with and without intellectual disability and psychiatric phenotype. Considering the patients' clinical synopsis, familial segregation analysis, and literature review, we postulated this variant to be causative of the disease. Indeed, the resulting missense mutation of Leu226Trp affects a highly conserved residue supporting our hypothesis that this mutation is potentially pathogenic. CONCLUSION: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of juvenile myoclonic epilepsy related to CACNA1A gene. Our results provide evidence for expanding the clinical and molecular findings related to the CACNA1A gene.
