PMID: 39003674
Title: Characterization of 13 Novel Genetic Variants in Genes Associated with Epilepsy: Implications for Targeted Therapeutic Strategies.
Authors: Marina Andjelkovic, Kristel Klaassen, Anita Skakic, Irena Marjanovic, Ruzica Kravljanac
Journal: Molecular diagnosis & therapy
Year: 2024
MeSH Terms: Humans, Epilepsy, Female, Child, Male, Genetic Predisposition to Disease, Child, Preschool, Exome Sequencing, Genetic Variation, High-Throughput Nucleotide Sequencing

Abstract:
BACKGROUND: Childhood epilepsies are caused by heterogeneous underlying disorders where approximately 40% of the origins of epilepsy can be attributed to genetic factors. The application of next-generation sequencing (NGS) has revolutionized molecular diagnostics and has enabled the identification of disease-causing genes and variants in childhood epilepsies. The objective of this study was to use NGS to identify variants in patients with childhood epilepsy, to expand the variant spectrum and discover potential therapeutic targets. METHODS: In our study, 55 children with epilepsy of unknown etiology were analyzed by combining clinical-exome and whole-exome sequencing. Novel variants were characterized using various in silico algorithms for pathogenicity and structure prediction. RESULTS: The molecular genetic cause of epilepsy was identified in 28 patients and the overall diagnostic success rate was 50.9%. We identified variants in 22 different genes associated with epilepsy that correlate well with the described phenotype. SCN1A gene variants were found in five unrelated patients, while ALDH7A1 and KCNQ2 gene variants were found twice. In the other 19 genes, variants were found only in a single patient. This includes genes such as ASH1L, CSNK2B, RHOBTB2, and SLC13A5, which have only recently been associated with epilepsy. Almost half of diagnosed patients (46.4%) carried novel variants. Interestingly, we identified variants in ALDH7A1, KCNQ2, PNPO, SCN1A, and SCN2A resulting in gene-directed therapy decisions for 11 children from our study, including four children who all carried novel SCN1A genetic variants. CONCLUSIONS: Described novel variants will contribute to a better understanding of the European genetic landscape, while insights into the genotype-phenotype correlation will contribute to a better understanding of childhood epilepsies worldwide. Given the expansion of molecular-based approaches, each newly identified genetic variant could become a potential therapeutic target.
