PMID: 15791137
Title: Rett syndrome.
Authors: Masaya Segawa, Yoshiko Nomura
Journal: Current opinion in neurology
Year: 2005
MeSH Terms: Animals, Chromosomal Proteins, Non-Histone, DNA-Binding Proteins, Humans, Methyl-CpG-Binding Protein 2, Repressor Proteins, Rett Syndrome

Abstract:
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Nearly 70 reports on Rett syndrome were published in 2004. We have selected 51 articles, including clinical reports, on pathophysiology, genotype-phenotype correlation, and clinical and basic molecular biology studies. These articles explain how mutation of the gene (MECP2) for methyl-CpG-binding protein 2 causes the particular disorders of Rett syndrome, and also induces other neurodevelopmental disorders, clarifying the situation for future studies. RECENT FINDINGS: The role of X-chromosome inactivation has been clarified in animal experiments. New isoforms of MeCP2 have been discovered and its functional characteristics are under research. Understanding of the influence of the MECP2 mutation on other neurodevelopmental disorders has increased. However, there is no apparent progress in neurophysiological studies. SUMMARY: Clinical studies included the pathophysiology of stereotyped movement, and cardiac and respiratory disturbances, and there were four therapeutic trials including one for epilepsy. For genotype-phenotype correlation the role of X-chromosome inactivation was looked at and its basic mechanisms were studied extensively in animals. Characteristics of mutations in the C-terminus and the biological function of the new isoform, exon 1, were introduced. In studies on related neurodevelopmental disorders, a relationship is suggested between the MECP2 gene and autism-related gene, with overlapping pathways, but this is not common to other neurodevelopmental disorders. Developmental studies suggest an important role for MeCP2 in the formation and/or maintenance of synapses, and clarify the molecular biological aspects of Rett syndrome. However, early involvement of the aminergic neurons, suggested as the basic, pathognomonic lesion of Rett syndrome, has unfortunately not been investigated with the MECP2 mutation.
