Gene: SCN8A
PMID: 27559564
Source: GeneReviews (NCBI Bookshelf)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27559564/

=== CLINICAL CONTENT ===

1. SCN8A-Related Epilepsy and/or Neurodevelopmental Disorders.

Hammer MF(1), Xia M(2), Schreiber JM(3).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2016 Aug 25 [updated 2023 Apr 6].

Author information:
(1)Professor of Neurology, BIO5 Institute, University of Arizona, Tucson, 
Arizona
(2)COMBINEDBrain, Brentwood, Tennessee
(3)Children's National Hospital, Washington, DC

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: SCN8A-related epilepsy and/or neurodevelopmental 
disorders encompasses a spectrum of phenotypes. Epilepsy phenotypes include 
developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE) associated with severe 
developmental delays and usually pharmacoresistant epilepsy with multiple 
seizure types; mild-to-moderate developmental and epileptic encephalopathy 
(mild/modDEE, or intermediate epilepsy) with partially treatable epilepsy; 
self-limited familial infantile epilepsy (SeLFIE, also known as benign familial 
infantile epilepsy or BFIE) with normal cognition and medically treatable 
seizures; neurodevelopmental delays with generalized epilepsy (NDDwGE); and 
neurodevelopmental disorder without epilepsy (NDDwoE) with mild-to-moderate 
intellectual disability (though it can be severe in ~10% of affected 
individuals). Hypotonia and movement disorders including dystonia, ataxia, and 
choreoathetosis are common in some phenotypes. Sudden unexpected death in 
epilepsy (SUDEP) has been reported in some affected individuals.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SCN8A-related epilepsy and/or 
neurodevelopmental disorders is established in a proband with suggestive 
findings and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in SCN8A identified by molecular 
genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: Several studies suggest a favorable response to 
sodium channel blockers in the SCN8A-related epilepsy phenotypes of SCN8A-DEE, 
SCN8A-mild/modDEE, and SCN8A-SeLFIE. Supportive care: Seizure control should be 
managed by a pediatric neurologist with expertise in epilepsy management who is 
familiar with the pharmacotherapy for SCN8A-related epilepsy and aware of how it 
differs from treatment of similar disorders. Vigorous attempts to control 
seizures are warranted. Supportive care to improve quality of life, maximize 
function, and reduce complications is recommended, ideally involving 
multidisciplinary care by specialists in relevant fields. Surveillance: Periodic 
evaluations for neurologic, cognitive, and/or behavioral deterioration; 
monitoring with EEG and other modalities such as video EEG telemetry or 
ambulatory EEG when new or different seizure types are suspected. Because of the 
increased risk of SUDEP, monitoring seizures in individuals at higher risk, 
including those with generalized tonic-clonic seizures and/or nighttime 
seizures, is warranted. Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to 
clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk 
relatives of an affected individual in order to identify those who are at risk 
for developing seizures. This typically entails targeted molecular genetic 
testing for the known pathogenic variant(s) in the family. Pregnancy management: 
Pregnant women should receive counseling regarding the risks and benefits of 
using anti-seizure medications during pregnancy; the advantages and 
disadvantages of increasing maternal periconceptional folic acid supplementation 
to 4,000 µg daily; the effects of pregnancy on anti-seizure medication 
metabolism; and the effect of pregnancy on maternal seizure control. 
Agents/circumstances to avoid: Several families report worsening of seizures 
with levetiracetam.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SCN8A-related epilepsy and/or neurodevelopmental disorders 
are inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Individuals with more severe 
SCN8A-related phenotypes are more likely to have the disorder as the result of a 
de novo pathogenic variant than individuals with milder SCN8A-related 
phenotypes. Each child of an individual with SCN8A-related epilepsy and/or 
neurodevelopmental disorders has a 50% chance of inheriting the SCN8A pathogenic 
variant. Once the SCN8A pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected 
family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 27559564
