Gene: KCNQ2
PMID: 20437616
Source: GeneReviews (NCBI Bookshelf)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20437616/

=== CLINICAL CONTENT ===

1. KCNQ2-Related Disorders.

Miceli F(1), Soldovieri MV(2), Weckhuysen S(3), Cooper E(4), Taglialatela M(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2010 Apr 27 [updated 2022 May 19].

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Neuroscience, University of Naples 
Federico II, Naples, Italy
(2)Department of Medicine and Health Science, University of Molise, Campobasso, 
Italy
(3)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Antwerp;, Applied and 
Translational Neurogenomics Group, VIB Center for Molecular Neurology, Antwerp, 
Belgium
(4)Departments of Neurology, Neuroscience, and Molecular and Human Genetics, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: KCNQ2-related disorders represent a continuum of 
overlapping neonatal epileptic phenotypes ranging from self-limited familial 
neonatal epilepsy (SLFNE) at the mild end to neonatal-onset developmental and 
epileptic encephalopathy (NEO-DEE) at the severe end. Additional, less common 
phenotypes consisting of neonatal encephalopathy with non-epileptic myoclonus, 
infantile or childhood-onset developmental and epileptic encephalopathy (DEE), 
and isolated intellectual disability (ID) without epilepsy have also been 
described. KCNQ2-SLFNE is characterized by seizures that start in otherwise 
healthy infants between two and eight days after term birth and spontaneously 
disappear between the first and the sixth to 12th month of life. There is always 
a seizure-free interval between birth and the onset of seizures. Seizures are 
characterized by sudden onset with prominent motor involvement, often 
accompanied by apnea and cyanosis; video EEG identifies seizures as focal onset 
with tonic stiffening of limb(s) and some migration during each seizure's 
evolution. About 30% of individuals with KCNQ2-SLFNE develop epileptic seizures 
later in life. KCNQ2-NEO-DEE is characterized by multiple daily seizures 
beginning in the first week of life that are mostly tonic, with associated focal 
motor and autonomic features. Seizures generally cease between ages nine months 
and four years. At onset, EEG shows a burst-suppression pattern or multifocal 
epileptiform activity; early brain MRI can show basal ganglia hyperdensities and 
later MRIs may show white matter or general volume loss. Moderate-to-profound 
developmental impairment is present.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of a KCNQ2-related disorder is established in a 
proband with suggestive findings and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in KCNQ2 
identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: KCNQ2-SLFNE. Seizures are generally 
controlled with conventional anti-seizure medication (ASM), although a 
significant number of individuals experience seizure freedom spontaneously. 
KCNQ2-NEO-DEE. Seizures may be resistant to multiple ASMs alone or in 
combination. Seizure freedom is more likely achieved when receiving sodium 
channel blockers. Individualized therapies are utilized for developmental delay 
and intellectual disability. Surveillance: KCNQ2-SLFNE. EEG at age three, 12, 
and 24 months is appropriate. At 24 months EEG should be normal. KCNQ2-NEO-DEE. 
EEG monitoring as clinically indicated.
GENETIC COUNSELING: KCNQ2-related disorders are inherited in an autosomal 
dominant manner. Most individuals diagnosed with KCNQ2-SLFNE are heterozygous 
for a pathogenic variant inherited from a parent. Most individuals diagnosed 
with KCNQ2-NEO-DEE have a de novo pathogenic variant. Each child of a 
heterozygous individual with KCNQ2-SLFNE has a 50% chance of inheriting the 
pathogenic variant. Given the severity of the disease course, individuals with 
KCNQ2-NEO-DEE rarely reproduce. Once a KCNQ2 pathogenic variant has been 
identified in an affected family member, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at 
increased risk and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20437616
