Gene: SLC6A1
PMID: 36780407
Source: GeneReviews (NCBI Bookshelf)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36780407/

=== CLINICAL CONTENT ===

1. SLC6A1-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder.

Goodspeed K(1), Demarest S(2), Johannesen K(3)(4), Kang J(5), Lal D(6)(7), 
Angione K(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2023 Feb 9.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Neurology, and Psychiatry, University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Neurology, University of Colorado, 
Aurora, Colorado
(3)Department of Genetics, Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen, Denmark
(4)Department of Epilepsy Genetics and Personalized Treatment, Danish Epilepsy 
Center, Dianalund, Denmark
(5)Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee
(6)Genomic Medicine Institute & Epilepsy Center, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, 
Ohio
(7)Stanley Center of Psychiatric Research, Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, 
Cambridge, Massachusetts

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: SLC6A1-related neurodevelopmental disorder 
(SLC6A1-NDD) is characterized by mild-to-severe developmental delay and/or 
intellectual disability, hypotonia, epilepsy, movement disorders (e.g., tremor, 
stereotypies, ataxia), and neurobehavioral and/or psychiatric manifestations 
(e.g., autism spectrum disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, 
aggression, anxiety, and/or sleep disturbances). Language skills, particularly 
expressive language, are often more significantly affected than motor 
development. Developmental regression has been reported. Gastrointestinal 
manifestations (e.g., constipation, diarrhea) are also common.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SLC6A1-NDD is established in a proband with 
suggestive findings and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in SLC6A1 identified 
by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Developmental and educational support; 
anti-seizure medications are often needed to control seizures; behavioral 
strategies and/or neuropharmacologic interventions for psychiatric, behavioral, 
and/or sleep disorders; standard treatments for bowel dysfunction; family 
support and care coordination. Surveillance: Assess at each visit developmental 
and behavioral issues, new seizures and/or changes in seizures, movement 
disorders, constipation or diarrhea, and family needs. Agents/circumstances to 
avoid: Individuals with SLC6A1-NDD have intolerable behavioral side effects with 
levetiracetam at higher rates than reported in the general population. If 
behavioral side effects are experienced with levetiracetam, alternative 
anti-seizure medications should be considered.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SLC6A1-NDD is an autosomal dominant disorder typically 
caused by a de novo pathogenic variant. Rarely, individuals diagnosed with 
SLC6A1-NDD inherited a pathogenic variant from a heterozygous parent. Each child 
of an individual with SLC6A1-NDD has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic 
variant. Once the SLC6A1 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected 
family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 36780407
