Gene: CDKL5
PMID: 38603524
Source: GeneReviews (NCBI Bookshelf)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38603524/

=== CLINICAL CONTENT ===

1. CDKL5 Deficiency Disorder.

Benke TA(1), Demarest S(1), Angione K(1), Downs J(2), Leonard H(2), Saldaris 
J(2), Marsh ED(3), Olson H(4), Haviland I(4).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2024 Apr 11 [updated 2025 May 1].

Author information:
(1)University of Colorado School of Medicine / Children's Hospital Colorado, 
Aurora, Colorado
(2)Telethon Kids Institute, Nedlands, Australia
(3)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
(4)Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: CDKL5 deficiency disorder (CDD) is a developmental and 
epileptic encephalopathy (DEE) characterized by severe early-onset intractable 
epilepsy and motor, cognitive, visual, and autonomic disturbances. Movement 
disorders include chorea, dystonia, and stereotypical hand and leg movements. 
Although females are more commonly affected than males (female-to-male ratio is 
approximately 4:1), the severity of manifestations in heterozygous females and 
hemizygous males can be equivalent. However, the severity of the phenotype can 
vary depending on the type and position of the CDKL5 pathogenic variant, pattern 
of X-chromosome inactivation in females, and presence of postzygotic mosaicism 
in males or females, who can have mild manifestations.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of CDD is established in a female proband with 
suggestive clinical findings and a heterozygous CDKL5 pathogenic variant 
identified by molecular genetic testing. The diagnosis of CDD is established in 
a male proband with suggestive clinical findings and a hemizygous CDKL5 
pathogenic variant identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: International consensus recommendations 
for the assessment and management of individuals with CDD have been published. 
The management of individuals with CDD is complex and requires multiple 
specialty evaluations; referral to a CDKL5 Center of Excellence may allow 
families to coordinate care more easily for affected individuals. Targeted 
therapy: Ztalmy® (ganaxolone) is a targeted therapy for the treatment of 
epilepsy associated with CDD in individuals aged two years and older. This is 
the first approved treatment for seizures associated with CDD and the first 
treatment specifically for CDD. Supportive care: Multidisciplinary care by 
specialists in the fields of pediatric neurology including pediatric epilepsy, 
feeding and nutrition, sleep disorders, behavioral disorders, orthopedics, 
physical therapy, occupational therapy, speech-language disorders, and genetic 
counseling. Surveillance: Annual assessments by a medical home / primary care 
physician and specialists.
GENETIC COUNSELING: CDD is inherited in an X-linked manner. Approximately 99% of 
affected individuals represent simplex cases (i.e., a single occurrence in the 
family). The majority of individuals who represent simplex cases have the 
disorder as the result of a de novo germline or (rarely) postzygotic CDKL5 
pathogenic variant. Rarely, an individual with CDD has the disorder as the 
result of a CDKL5 pathogenic variant inherited from a heterozygous or mosaic 
mother. If the mother of the proband has a CDKL5 pathogenic variant, the chance 
of transmitting it in each pregnancy is 50%. Females who inherit the pathogenic 
variant will be heterozygous and are at high risk of being affected, although 
skewed X-chromosome inactivation and the possibility of other attenuating 
factors may result in a variable phenotype. Males who inherit the pathogenic 
variant will be hemizygous and will most likely be severely affected. Once the 
CDKL5 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, 
prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 38603524
