Gene: SLC2A1
PMID: 20301603
Source: GeneReviews (NCBI Bookshelf)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20301603/

=== CLINICAL CONTENT ===

1. Glucose Transporter Type 1 Deficiency Syndrome.

Wang D(1), Sands T(2), Tang M(2), Monani U(2), De Vivo D(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2002 Jul 30 [updated 2025 Mar 6].

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Piedmont Fayette Hospital, Fayetteville, GA, 
Northside Hospital, Duluth, GA
(2)Division of Pediatric Neurology, Columbia University, Neurological Institute 
of New York, New York, New York

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Glucose transporter type 1 deficiency syndrome 
(Glut1DS) is a disorder of brain energy metabolism. Glucose, the essential 
metabolic fuel for the brain, is transported into the brain exclusively by the 
protein glucose transporter type 1 (Glut1) across the endothelial cells forming 
the blood-brain barrier (BBB). Glut1DS results from the inability of Glut1 to 
transfer sufficient glucose across the BBB to meet the glucose demands of the 
brain. The needs of the brain for glucose increase rapidly after birth, peaking 
in early childhood, remaining high until about age 10 years, then gradually 
decreasing throughout adolescence and plateauing in early adulthood. When first 
diagnosed in infancy to early childhood, the predominant clinical findings of 
Glut1DS are paroxysmal eye-head movements, pharmacoresistant seizures of varying 
types, deceleration of head growth, and developmental delay. Subsequently 
children develop complex movement disorders and intellectual disability ranging 
from mild to severe. Institution of ketogenic diet therapies (KDTs) helps with 
early neurologic growth and development and seizure control. Typically, the 
earlier the treatment the better the long-term clinical outcome. When first 
diagnosed in later childhood to adulthood (occasionally in a parent following 
the diagnosis of an affected child), the predominant clinical findings of 
Glut1DS are usually complex paroxysmal movement disorders, spasticity, ataxia, 
dystonia, speech difficulty, and intellectual disability.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of Glut1DS is established in a proband with 
suggestive clinical findings, hypoglycorrhachia documented by lumbar puncture, 
and a (usually) heterozygous pathogenic variant in SLC2A1 identified by 
molecular genetic testing. Rarely, an individual with suggestive clinical 
findings and hypoglycorrhachia has biallelic SLC2A1 pathogenic variants.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapy: Age-specific KDTs primarily provide a supplemental 
fuel, namely, ketone bodies, for brain energy metabolism. KDTs create chronic 
ketosis by largely replacing carbohydrates and proteins with lipids in varying 
ratios. Supportive care: In addition to educational programs to address the 
individual's needs, multidisciplinary care by specialists in neurology familiar 
with KDTs, physical medicine and rehabilitation, physical therapy, occupational 
therapy, speech and therapy, and clinical genetics and genetic counseling. 
Surveillance: Routinely scheduled evaluations with a neurologist (to determine 
response to KDTs and identify any new manifestations) as well as follow up per 
treating physical therapists, occupational therapists, and speech-language 
therapists. Agents/circumstances to avoid: In individuals on KDTs: (1) avoidance 
of treatment of seizures with valproic acid, because it increases the risk of a 
Reye-like illness and may also inhibit glucose transport; (2) other anti-seizure 
medications (ASMs) including phenobarbital, acetazolamide, topiramate, and 
zonisamide may be relatively contraindicated as adjunctive treatment. Evaluation 
of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to evaluate at-risk newborns, infants, 
and other relatives of a proband to identify as early as possible those who 
would benefit from initiation of treatment and preventive measures. Early 
initiation of KDTs, ideally in infancy, results in better seizure control and 
improves long-term neurologic outcome.
GENETIC COUNSELING: Glut1DS is most commonly caused by a heterozygous SLC2A1 
pathogenic variant and inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. About 90% of 
individuals with Glut1DS have the disorder as the result of a de novo SLC2A1 
pathogenic variant; about 10% of individuals have the disorder as the result of 
a pathogenic variant inherited from a parent. The degree of impairment in the 
transmitting parent may be mild or nonexistent; parental somatic mosaicism for 
the SLC2A1 pathogenic variant may explain this observation. Each child of an 
individual with autosomal dominant Glut1DS has a 50% chance of inheriting the 
SLC2A1 pathogenic variant and being clinically affected. Autosomal recessive 
inheritance has been reported in two families to date. Once the SLC2A1 
pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected family member, 
prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing for Glut1DS are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301603
