Gene: STXBP1
PMID: 27905812
Source: GeneReviews (NCBI Bookshelf)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27905812/

=== CLINICAL CONTENT ===

1. STXBP1 Encephalopathy with Epilepsy.

Mercimek-Andrews S(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2016 Dec 1 [updated 2023 Sep 28].

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, University 
of Alberta, Alberta Health Services, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: STXBP1 encephalopathy with epilepsy is characterized 
by early-onset developmental delay, intellectual disability or cognitive 
dysfunction, and epilepsy. The median age of onset of seizures is six weeks 
(range: 1 day to 13 years). Seizure types can include infantile spasms; 
generalized tonic-clonic, clonic, or tonic seizures; and myoclonic, atonic, 
absence, and focal seizures. EEG abnormalities can include focal epileptic 
activity, burst suppression, hypsarrhythmia, or generalized spike-and-slow 
waves. Other neurologic findings include abnormal tone, movement disorders 
(especially ataxia and dystonia), and behavioral issues and autism spectrum 
disorder. Feeding difficulties are common.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis is established in a proband with a heterozygous 
STXBP1 pathogenic variant identified by molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Standard treatments for developmental, 
cognitive, and neurobehavioral issues. The most commonly used anti-seizure 
medications (ASMs) are phenobarbital, valproic acid, and vigabatrin. About 20% 
of individuals require more than one ASM and approximately 25% are refractory to 
ASM therapy. Severe dystonia, dyskinesia, and choreoathetosis can be treated 
with monoamine-depleting or dopaminergic agents. Treatment per orthopedics, 
physical medicine and rehabilitation, physical therapy, and occupational therapy 
to help avoid contractures and falls, with positioning and mobility devices as 
needed. Feeding difficulties and constipation are managed per standard 
protocols. Social work support and care coordination as needed. Surveillance: 
Monitor developmental progress and educational needs, seizures, changes in tone, 
movement disorders, behavioral issues, growth and nutritional status, evidence 
of constipation, and family needs at each visit; follow-up EEG as needed; 
occupational and physical therapy assessments as needed.
GENETIC COUNSELING: STXBP1 encephalopathy with epilepsy is an autosomal dominant 
disorder typically caused by a de novo pathogenic variant. Most individuals 
reported to date represent simplex cases (i.e., the only family member known to 
be affected) and have the disorder as the result of a de novo STXBP1 pathogenic 
variant. Individuals with STXBP1 encephalopathy with epilepsy are not known to 
reproduce. Once the STXBP1 pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected 
family member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are available.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 27905812
