Gene: ALDH7A1
PMID: 20301659
Source: PubMed Clinical Review
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20301659/

=== CLINICAL CONTENT ===

1. Pyridoxine-Dependent Epilepsy – ALDH7A1.

Gospe SM Jr(1)(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2001 Dec 7 [updated 2022 Sep 22].

Author information:
(1)Herman and Faye Sarkowsky Endowed Chair Emeritus of Child Neurology, 
Professor Emeritus, Neurology and Pediatrics, University of Washington School of 
Medicine, Seattle, Washington
(2)Adjunct Professor, Pediatrics, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Pyridoxine-dependent epilepsy – ALDH7A1 (PDE-ALDH7A1) 
is characterized by seizures not well controlled with anti-seizure medication 
that are responsive clinically and electrographically to large daily supplements 
of pyridoxine (vitamin B6). This is true across a phenotypic spectrum that 
ranges from classic to atypical PDE-ALDH7A1. Intellectual disability is common, 
particularly in classic PDE-ALDH7A1. In classic PDE-ALDH7A1, untreated seizures 
begin within the first weeks to months of life. Dramatic presentations of 
prolonged seizures and recurrent episodes of status epilepticus are typical; 
recurrent self-limited events including partial seizures, generalized seizures, 
atonic seizures, myoclonic events, and infantile spasms also occur. 
Electrographic seizures can occur without clinical correlates. In atypical 
PDE-ALDH7A1, findings in untreated individuals can include late-onset seizures 
beginning between late infancy and age three years, seizures that initially 
respond to anti-seizure medication and then become intractable, seizures during 
early life that do not respond to pyridoxine but are subsequently controlled 
with pyridoxine several months later, and prolonged seizure-free intervals (≤5 
months) that occur after discontinuation of pyridoxine.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of PDE-ALDH7A1 is suspected in a proband with 
seizures responsive to pyridoxine administration and increased concentration of 
alpha-aminoadipic semialdehyde (α-AASA) in urine and/or plasma. The diagnosis is 
established in a proband with suggestive clinical findings and biallelic 
pathogenic (or likely pathogenic) variants in ALDH7A1 identified by molecular 
genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Targeted therapies: Targeted therapy requires lifelong pharmacologic 
supplements of pyridoxine; the rarity of the disorder has precluded controlled 
studies to evaluate the optimal dose. The International PDE Consortium published 
clinical practice guidelines recommending pyridoxine doses by age (newborns: 100 
mg/day; infants: 30 mg/kg/day with a maximum of 300 mg/day; children, 
adolescents, and adults: 30 mg/kg/day with a maximum of 500 mg/day) and dietary 
modifications targeted at reducing lysine intake. To prevent exacerbation of 
clinical seizures and/or encephalopathy during an acute illness, the daily dose 
of pyridoxine may be doubled for several days. Supportive care: Supportive care 
for developmental delay and/or intellectual disability follows standard 
practice. Prevention of secondary complications: Overuse of pyridoxine can cause 
a reversible sensory neuropathy. Surveillance: Recommendations to monitor 
existing manifestations, the individual's response to supportive care, and the 
emergence of new manifestations include regular assessments by the treating 
neurologist for control of epilepsy via targeted therapy with pyridoxine, need 
for concomitant use of anti-seizure medications, and signs of sensory 
neuropathy, as well as regular assessments of developmental progress and 
educational needs. Evaluation of relatives at risk: Prenatal molecular genetic 
testing of fetuses at risk may be performed to inform maternal pyridoxine 
supplementation during pregnancy and facilitate initiation of treatment at 
birth. If prenatal testing has not been performed on a pregnancy at risk, the 
neonate should receive therapeutic doses of pyridoxine until molecular genetic 
testing for the family-specific ALDH7A1 variants has been completed. Pregnancy 
management: Maternal supplemental pyridoxine at a dose of 50-100 mg/day 
throughout the last half of pregnancy and after birth may be considered if the 
fetus is known to be affected or, if diagnostic prenatal testing is not pursued, 
in an at-risk fetus and neonate until the diagnosis has been ruled out.
GENETIC COUNSELING: PDE-ALDH7A1 is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. 
If both parents are known to be heterozygous for an ALDH7A1 pathogenic variant, 
each sib of an affected individual has at conception a 25% chance of being 
affected, a 50% chance of being an asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% chance of 
being unaffected and not a carrier. Once the ALDH7A1 pathogenic variants have 
been identified in an affected family member, carrier testing for relatives at 
risk, prenatal testing for a pregnancy at increased risk, and preimplantation 
genetic testing for PDE-ALDH7A1 are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301659
