Gene: DEPDC5
PMID: 27683934
Source: PubMed Clinical Review
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27683934/

=== CLINICAL CONTENT ===

1. DEPDC5-Related Epilepsy.

Baulac S(1), Baldassari S(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2016 Sep 29 [updated 2023 Mar 9].

Author information:
(1)Institut du Cerveau (ICM), Paris Brain Institute, Paris, France

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: DEPDC5-related epilepsy encompasses a range of 
epilepsy syndromes, almost all of which are characterized by focal seizures, 
with seizure onset in a discrete area of the brain. While most individuals with 
DEPDC5-related epilepsy have a normal brain MRI, some have epilepsy associated 
with a cortical malformation, usually focal cortical dysplasia or 
hemimegalencephaly. Seizure syndromes include familial focal epilepsy with 
variable foci (FFEVF), autosomal dominant sleep-related hypermotor epilepsy 
(ADSHE), familial mesial temporal lobe epilepsies (FMTLE), autosomal dominant 
epilepsy with auditory features (ADEAF), infantile spasms, and severe 
developmental encephalopathy. Although psychomotor development is usually 
normal, developmental delays, intellectual disability, or autism spectrum 
disorder have been reported in some individuals.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of DEPDC5-related epilepsy is established in a 
proband with suggestive findings and at least one heterozygous pathogenic 
variant in DEPDC5 identified by molecular genetic testing. Some affected 
individuals have biallelic variants in DEPDC5, and some have a second mosaic (or 
postzygotic) DEPDC5 variant within the brain.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: The response to anti-seizure medication 
(ASM) is variable. While some individuals respond well to first-line ASMs, 
others are more refractory to treatment. There is currently no evidence that 
seizures respond better to one specific ASM. In individuals with 
hemimegalencephaly or focal cortical dysplasia and refractory epilepsy, 
resective epilepsy surgery should be explored early in the disease course. 
Standard treatment for developmental delay / intellectual disability and autism 
spectrum disorders. Surveillance: Assess for new or ongoing neurologic 
manifestations (such as new-onset seizures or changes in seizure symptoms), 
predictive factors for sudden unexpected death in epilepsy, and developmental 
progress at each visit. Repeat EEG as appropriate when seizure frequency 
increases or when seizures of new symptomatology occur. Repeat brain MRI with a 
higher-resolution technique in individuals with treatment-resistant seizures 
whose first brain MRI was normal to rule out subtle cortical dysplasia. 
Evaluation of relatives at risk: It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status 
of apparently asymptomatic older and younger at-risk relatives of an affected 
individual in order to identify those who are at risk for developing seizures as 
early as possible. This typically entails targeted molecular genetic testing for 
the known pathogenic variant(s) in the family. Pregnancy management: Pregnant 
women should receive counseling regarding the risks and benefits of using ASM 
during pregnancy; the advantages and disadvantages of increasing maternal 
periconceptional folic acid supplementation to 4,000 µg daily; the effects of 
pregnancy on ASM metabolism; and the effect of pregnancy on maternal seizure 
control.
GENETIC COUNSELING: DEPDC5-related epilepsy is an autosomal dominant disorder; 
however, affected individuals with germline biallelic missense variants have 
been rarely reported. All probands reported to date with biallelic DEPDC5 
variants inherited variants from their heterozygous parents. In these families, 
heterozygous parents may or may not have manifestations of DEPDC5-related 
epilepsy. The risk to the sibs of the proband depends on the genetic status of 
the proband's parents. If one parent of the proband has a DEPDC5 pathogenic 
variant, the risk to the sibs of inheriting the pathogenic variant is 50%. If 
both parents of a proband have a DEPDC5 pathogenic variant, sibs have a 75% 
chance of inheriting one or two pathogenic variants and a 25% chance of 
inheriting neither pathogenic variant and not being affected. Once the DEPDC5 
pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected family member, 
prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 27683934
