Gene: KCNQ3
PMID: 24851285
Source: GeneReviews (NCBI Bookshelf)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24851285/

=== CLINICAL CONTENT ===

1. KCNQ3-Related Disorders.

Miceli F(1), Soldovieri MV(2), Weckhuysen S(3), Cooper EC(4), Taglialatela M(1).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2014 May 22 [updated 2023 Sep 28].

Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmacology, Department of Neuroscience, University of Naples 
Federico II, Naples, Italy
(2)Department of Health Science, University of Molise, Campobasso, Italy
(3)Applied & Translational Neurogenomics Group, VIB Center for Molecular 
Neurology, University of Antwerp;, Neurology Department, University Hospital, 
Antwerp, Belgium
(4)Departments of Neurology, Neuroscience, and Molecular and Human Genetics, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: KCNQ3-related disorders include self-limited familial 
neonatal epilepsy (SLFNE) and self-limited familial infantile epilepsy (SLFIE), 
seizure disorders that occur in children who typically have normal psychomotor 
development. An additional KCNQ3-related neurodevelopmental disorder (NDD) with 
and without epilepsy has also been described. In KCNQ3-SLFNE, seizures begin in 
an otherwise healthy infant between age days two and eight of life and 
spontaneously disappear within the first year of life. Seizures are generally 
brief, lasting one to two minutes. Seizure types include tonic or apneic 
episodes and focal clonic activity, with or without autonomic changes. Motor 
activity may be confined to one body part, migrate to other regions, or 
generalize. Infants are normal between seizures and feed normally. In 
KCNQ3-SLFIE, seizures start in the first year of life beyond the neonatal period 
and disappear after age one to two years. Seizures are generally brief, lasting 
two minutes; they appear as daily repeated clusters. Seizure types are usually 
focal, but can also include generalized, causing diffuse hypertonia with jerks 
of the limbs, head deviation, or motor arrest with unconsciousness and cyanosis. 
Infants are normal between seizures and psychomotor development is usually 
normal. In KCNQ3-NDD, individuals present with intellectual disability with or 
without seizures and/or cortical visual impairment. As little clinical 
information on these individuals is available, the clinical presentation of 
KCNQ3-NDD remains to be defined.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of a KCNQ3-related disorder is established in a 
proband with suggestive findings and at least one heterozygous pathogenic 
variant in KCNQ3 identified by molecular genetic testing. Rarely, affected 
individuals have biallelic pathogenic variants in KCNQ3.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: The seizures of KCNQ3-SLFNE are 
generally controlled with anti-seizure medications (ASMs) including 
phenobarbital and phenytoin or carbamazepine, usually withdrawn at age three to 
six months. The seizures of KCNQ3-SLFIE are usually completely controlled with 
adequate doses of phenobarbital, carbamazepine, or valproate. In rare instances 
of seizure recurrence, the starting dose of ASM is often low. ASMs are usually 
withdrawn after one to three years. KCNQ3-NDD is managed using standard 
evaluations, therapies, and educational support tailored to the individual's 
needs. Surveillance: In children with KCNQ3-SLFNE, EEGs at onset and age three, 
12, and 24 months are recommended; the EEG at 24 months should be normal. In 
children with KCNQ3-SLFIE, EEGs at onset and age 12, 24, and 36 months are 
recommended; the EEG at 36 months should be normal. Pregnancy management: The 
management of a pregnant woman with a KCNQ3 pathogenic variant is the same as 
that for any other pregnant woman with a seizure disorder or at increased risk 
for a seizure disorder: (1) no ASM is required if the woman has been 
seizure-free or if the woman has no history of seizures; and (2) ASM may be 
continued for epilepsy that is active during pregnancy.
GENETIC COUNSELING: KCNQ3-SLFNE and KCNQ3-SLFIE are inherited in an autosomal 
dominant manner; most individuals have an affected parent, or a parent known to 
have been symptomatic in infancy. KCNQ3-NDD typically occurs as an autosomal 
dominant disorder caused by a de novo pathogenic variant. Rarely, KCNQ3-NDD is 
caused by biallelic pathogenic variants and inherited in an autosomal recessive 
manner. Autosomal dominant inheritance: Each child of an individual with 
KCNQ3-SLFNE, KCNQ3-SLFIE, or autosomal dominant KCNQ3-NDD has a 50% chance of 
inheriting the pathogenic variant. Autosomal recessive inheritance: If both 
parents of a child with autosomal recessive KCNQ3-NDD are known to be 
heterozygous for a KCNQ3 pathogenic variant, each sib of an affected individual 
has a 25% chance of being affected at conception, a 50% chance of being an 
asymptomatic carrier, and a 25% of being asymptomatic and not a carrier. Once 
the KCNQ3 pathogenic variant(s) have been identified in an affected family 
member, prenatal and preimplantation genetic testing are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 24851285
