Gene: MECP2
PMID: 20301670
Source: GeneReviews (NCBI Bookshelf)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/20301670/

=== CLINICAL CONTENT ===

1. MECP2 Disorders.

Kaur S(1), Christodoulou J(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2001 Oct 3 [updated 2025 Dec 4].

Author information:
(1)Brain and Mitochondrial Research Group, Murdoch Children’s Research 
Institute;, Department of Paediatrics, University of Melbourne, Parkville, 
Victoria, Australia
(2)Professor, Pediatrics and Biochemical, Molecular, and Human Genetics, Theme 
Director, Genetics Research, Murdoch Children’s Research Institute;, Chair of 
Genomic Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: The spectrum of MECP2-related phenotypes in females 
ranges from classic Rett syndrome to variant Rett syndrome with a broader 
clinical phenotype (either milder or more severe than classic Rett syndrome) to 
mild learning disabilities; the spectrum in males ranges from severe neonatal 
encephalopathy to pyramidal signs, parkinsonism, and macroorchidism (PPM-X) 
syndrome to severe syndromic/nonsyndromic intellectual disability. Females: 
Classic Rett syndrome, a progressive neurodevelopmental disorder primarily 
affecting girls, is characterized by apparently normal psychomotor development 
during the first six to 18 months of life, followed by a short period of 
developmental stagnation, then rapid regression in language and motor skills, 
followed by long-term stability. During the phase of rapid regression, 
repetitive, stereotypic hand movements replace purposeful hand use. Additional 
findings include fits of screaming and inconsolable crying, autistic features, 
panic-like attacks, bruxism, episodic apnea and/or hyperpnea, gait ataxia and 
apraxia, tremors, seizures, and acquired microcephaly. Males: Severe 
neonatal-onset encephalopathy, the most common phenotype in affected males, is 
characterized by a relentless clinical course that follows a 
metabolic-degenerative type of pattern, abnormal tone, involuntary movements, 
severe seizures, and breathing abnormalities. Death often occurs before age two 
years.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of a MECP2 disorder is established by molecular 
genetic testing in a female proband with suggestive findings and a heterozygous 
MECP2 pathogenic variant, and in a male proband with suggestive findings and a 
hemizygous MECP2 pathogenic variant.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Treatment is mainly symptomatic and 
focuses on optimizing the individual's abilities using a multidisciplinary 
approach that should also include psychosocial support for family members. 
Risperidone may help in treating agitation; melatonin can ameliorate sleep 
disturbances. Treatment of seizures, constipation, gastroesophageal reflux, 
scoliosis, prolonged QTc, and spasticity per standard care. Surveillance: 
Periodic evaluation by the multidisciplinary team; regular assessment of QTc for 
evidence of prolongation; regular assessment for scoliosis. Agents/circumstances 
to avoid: Drugs known to prolong the QT interval.
GENETIC COUNSELING: MECP2 disorders are inherited in an X-linked manner. More 
than 99% are simplex cases (i.e., a single occurrence in a family), resulting 
from a de novo pathogenic variant or possibly from inheritance of the pathogenic 
variant from a parent who has germline mosaicism. Rarely, a MECP2 variant may be 
inherited from a heterozygous mother in whom favorable skewing of X-chromosome 
inactivation results in minimal to no clinical findings. When the mother is a 
known heterozygote, the risk to her offspring of inheriting the MECP2 variant is 
50%. When the pathogenic MECP2 variant has been identified in the family, 
heterozygote testing for at-risk female relatives, prenatal testing for 
pregnancies at increased risk, and preimplantation genetic testing are possible. 
Because of the possibility of parental germline mosaicism, it is appropriate to 
offer prenatal diagnosis to couples who have had a child with a MECP2 disorder 
regardless of whether the MECP2 pathogenic variant has been detected in a 
parent.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 20301670
