Gene: SCN3A
PMID: 34081427
Source: GeneReviews (NCBI Bookshelf)
URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34081427/

=== CLINICAL CONTENT ===

1. SCN3A-Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder.

Helbig KL(1), Goldberg EM(2).

In: Adam MP, Bick S, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, editors. 
GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 
1993–2026.
2021 Jun 3 [updated 2025 May 1].

Author information:
(1)The Epilepsy Neurogenetics Initiative, Division of Neurology, Department of 
Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
(2)The Epilepsy Neurogenetics Initiative, Division of Neurology, Department of 
Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia;, Departments of Neurology 
and Neuroscience, The University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: SCN3A-related neurodevelopmental disorder (SCN3A-NDD) 
encompasses a spectrum of clinical severity associated with epilepsy and/or 
brain malformation. Affected individuals may have (a) developmental and 
epileptic encephalopathy (DEE) (i.e., intractable seizures with developmental 
delays associated with ongoing epileptiform EEG activity) with or without 
malformations of cortical development; or (b) malformations of cortical 
development with or without mild focal epilepsy. Some degree of early childhood 
developmental delay is seen in all affected individuals; the severity varies 
widely, ranging from isolated speech delay to severe developmental delay. 
Infantile hypotonia is common but may be mild or absent in those without DEE. In 
those with DEE, seizure onset is typically in the first six to 12 months of 
life. A variety of seizure types have been described. Seizures remain 
intractable to multiple anti-seizure medications in approximately 50% of 
individuals with DEE without malformations of cortical development (MCD) and in 
90% of individuals with DEE and MCD. Seizures may be absent or infrequent in 
those without DEE. Brain MRI findings range from normal to showing thinning or 
hypoplasia of the corpus callosum, to various malformations of cortical 
development. Autonomic dysregulation, oromotor dysfunction leading to the need 
for gastrostomy tube placement, progressive microcephaly, hyperkinetic movement 
disorder, and cortical visual impairment can also be seen in those with DEE.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: The diagnosis of SCN3A-NDD is established in a proband with 
suggestive findings and a heterozygous pathogenic variant in SCN3A identified by 
molecular genetic testing.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Empiric treatment of seizures with 
standard anti-seizure medications (no specific anti-seizure medication has been 
shown to be more efficacious than another); feeding therapy and consideration of 
gastrostomy tube placement in those with dysphagia; standard treatment for 
developmental delay / intellectual disability, spasticity, hyperkinetic 
movements, autonomic dysfunction, and central visual impairment. Surveillance: 
At each visit: measurement of growth parameters; evaluation for signs/symptoms 
of a movement disorder or autonomic dysfunction; monitor for new seizures or 
changes in seizures; assessment of developmental progress, educational needs, 
behavioral issues, mobility and self-help skills; annual ophthalmology 
evaluation to assess for visual impairment. Agents/circumstances to avoid: There 
is no evidence that specific anti-seizure medications can worsen seizures 
associated with SCN3A-NDD. There is no evidence that sleep deprivation or fever 
exacerbate seizures associated with SCN3A-NDD. Evaluation of relatives at risk: 
It is appropriate to clarify the genetic status of apparently asymptomatic 
younger at-risk relatives of an affected individual in order to identify as 
early as possible those who would benefit from early treatment. Pregnancy 
management: Use of anti-seizure medication during pregnancy reduces the risk for 
mortality during pregnancy, but exposure to anti-seizure medication may increase 
the risk for adverse fetal outcome (depending on the drug used, the dose, and 
the stage of pregnancy at which medication is taken). The risk of an adverse 
outcome to the fetus from anti-seizure medication exposure is often less than 
that associated with exposure to an untreated maternal seizure disorder. 
Discussion of the risks and benefits of using a given anti-seizure medication 
during pregnancy should ideally take place prior to conception. Transitioning to 
a lower-risk medication prior to pregnancy may be possible.
GENETIC COUNSELING: SCN3A-NDD is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. The 
majority of probands diagnosed with SCN3A-NDD have the disorder as the result of 
a de novo pathogenic variant. If a parent of the proband is affected and/or is 
known to have the SCN3A pathogenic variant identified in the proband, the risk 
to the sibs of inheriting the pathogenic variant is 50%. Once the SCN3A 
pathogenic variant has been identified in an affected family member, prenatal 
testing for a pregnancy at increased risk and preimplantation genetic testing 
are possible.

Copyright © 1993-2026, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved. Test.

PMID: 34081427
